welcome to toccast it's been a while
since i've done a podcast like this one
in fact you have to go all the way back
to episode 22 the logic of experimental
tests
and episode 19 mr popper's problems the
former the logic of experimental tests
is a podcast devoted to unpacking an
academic paper written by david deutsch
published in the journal
studies in the history and philosophy of
modern physics and the latter mr
popper's problems is a podcast about a
paper by karl popper called the nature
of philosophical problems and their
roots in science which is largely a
criticism of wittgenstein and well a
defense of philosophy itself against
unusually philosophers
so with this episode i'm again departing
from the usual style and content of my
videos discussing the work of david
deutch karl popper and associated things
in science and philosophy and them going
quite niche indeed once more a little
bit esoteric i guess because again i'm
attempting to turn an academic journal
article into a podcast
this is fun for me
i should add this isn't just me reading
the article by the way you can do that
for yourself
this is a bit of reading and largely my
own analysis and comparisons
anyway without further ado let's get
into that
the aim of science
what is science
lots of scientists and philosophers will
try and tell you what it is many will
get parts of it correct many won't i
don't want to spend too much time
criticizing all the false theories and
explanations about what science is right
here and now
instead i'm going to look at the best we
have and for that of course we can turn
to karl popper and david deutsch
but didn't popper just say it was all
about falsification
if you think this
you're on side with so many prominent
physicists especially and science
communicators and philosophers who read
a book once where it said that's what
popper said
but actually there is more to it to put
it mildly
the capacity for science to be
distinguished from things that are not
science is indeed drawn by the line we
call
falsifiability
but although that is a necessary
condition
it's not a sufficient one david deutsch
has explained how we are after good
explanations in science morality
philosophy history
everywhere
and deutsch picks up where papa left off
but where was that
well poppa did explain his broader view
of science many times and many times he
was ignored
or mangled or misunderstood or
misrepresented
so it does take people like deutsch to
clarify and refine what he meant popper
wrote whole books explaining his
position in terms of what science is or
the aim of science he actually wrote
directly on that topic so that's my
purpose here today to unpack one of his
shorter essays and the essay is called
the aim of science now this is an essay
that i'm about to read in part that
appears in multiple places but you can
find it on my website at
www.bretthall.org
under the title the aim of science the
link is in the description to both a
clean copy of the pdf and to the pdf
with some of my remarks
the essay seems first to have appeared
in what is known as the postscript to
the logic of scientific discovery this
is popper's first book and as many of us
who follow popa have observed it's not
our favorite of his works it's his least
best
one reason i say that that it's not his
best is because he is writing for his
peers in their language and he was
conceding to them rather a lot that only
later people were persuaded was entirely
wrong papa was sometimes generous in
that way it seems in going a long way in
his arguments and attempts at persuasion
and his explanations at meeting his
opponents with an entirely different
world view at least part of the way
the logic of scientific discovery his
first book is very dense it's hard to
read i read it once and i wasn't really
inspired to read it again but i kind of
coerced myself into reading parts of it
later and yes it didn't really stand up
to being an inspiring book even though
so much of the new stuff that popper
discovered in terms of how knowledge
works is right there in its nascent form
it's just as i say expressed in language
which is to me clunky and tedious so if
i was to make a recommendation about
reading papa i would say read anything
else the same ideas of his are expressed
far better later in his more recent
works rather than his most early work
and of course in the work of david
deutsch where you get a refined
clarified distilled version of the most
important parts of papa's philosophy and
so what i'd like to do today is to
compare
some of popper's work here regarding
what the aim of science is with what we
now understand the aim of science
happens to be
this essay as i say
appears in other places it appears in
the book objective knowledge and also in
a book called realism and the aim of
science both of which are entire books
they're very long the first objective
knowledge is more a collection of essays
but it's one of my favorite books of
poppers simply because it covers so much
ground in epistemology in a really
simple way in that book objective
knowledge he dispenses with induction he
covers arguments explaining realism and
compares it to forms of philosophical
nonsense and he refines what might be
meant by the word truth and various
approaches to truth and he talks about
knowledge without a subject which is
deeply understood by well let's say it
anyone who has never understood papa and
this is what makes papa the philosopher
of objective knowledge there is that
other epistemology called perversely
objectivism but it never grapples with
knowledge in actual objects and it still
falls back in large part on subjective
feelings like confidence and certainty
so it's actually subjective in both
senses poppa's epistemology on the other
hand is objective in both senses the
book objective knowledge also touches on
papa's theory of mind some things about
political philosophy and freedom or free
will and determinism and indeterminism
realism has applied to history and some
other things and the amazing essay the
bucket and the searchlight about how
knowledge is created and there's more
anyways among all of that is this short
essay the aim of science that i'm going
to read through today
that essay is incorporated then into an
entire book of approximately the same
name that book is realism in the aim of
science which is a 400 something page
term
but the essay itself the aim of science
was published in 1956 so as far as i
know it's out of copyright but i thought
it very useful to go through as it's
brief and i was reading it again
recently because so much can be learnt
directly from it and so much more can be
learned by comparing the essay in its
original form to the improvements made
sense by david deutsch and as much can
be learned again by comparing this
vision of what science is in terms of
the popularian deutsche view about
science with what everyone else thinks
science is about today people talk about
science so much today about being
confident in science about following the
science and so on and so forth so
reminding ourselves of in fact what our
best understanding of science is should
help us anytime someone says that we
need to
follow the science let's say
and what you will see almost immediately
when i begin reading is that papa says
the aim of science that framing
could rightly be seen to be misleading
so with all of that in mind let's begin
some reading as i say the essay is there
on my website right now you can find a
clean pdf copy of it and my comments as
well which amount to my notes for this
podcast but of course what you'll be
missing there
as you will be in the audio only version
of this is the video with some hopefully
interesting images to accompany my
reading anyway let's begin
the aim of science and proper rights
to speak of the aim of scientific
activity may perhaps sound a little
naive for clearly different scientists
have different aims and science itself
whatever that may mean has no aims i
admit all this and yet it seems that
when we speak of science we do feel more
or less clearly that there is something
characteristic of scientific activity
and since scientific activity looks
pretty much like a rational activity and
since a rational activity must have some
aim the attempt to describe the aim of
science may not be entirely futile end
quote okay so already he has the caveat
and this is due to the imprecision of
language don't take too literally the
claim that science has a name as in it
is aiming for a particular thing you
know take particle physics for example
is the aim to just find ever smaller
particles you might think so but that
would be to presume the conclusion that
would presume too much it assumes that
you can go on forever finding ever
smaller particles or maybe you just
think the aim should be to find the
smallest particle maybe the particles
inside the electron so to speak
similar error who says there must be
such a thing the aim of science in
modern speak is just to solve
scientific problems that might be a
little circular it seems but it's not
entirely vacuous you have to identify
the problem first which can also be a
part of science
papa goes on
quote i suggest that it is the aim of
science to find satisfactory
explanations of whatever strikes us as
being in need of explanation end quote
well there we go isn't that nice right
there up front anyone who is listening
now to me will know that i like many
popularians complain that people who
critique papa almost never read poppa
directly or at least don't read enough
of him or perhaps read but do not
understand him and he is a perfect
example there it is in black and white
when prominent scientists and science
communicators or philosophers or let's
throw podcasters into that mix when they
say well papa was naive poppa thought
that science was just about falsifiable
ideas or claims or theories or whatever
you like we can see here now that that
is a complete misconception poppa knew
that science was about explaining the
world about explanations and indeed of
anything in the physical world that you
like but we do see here at this point
that he's invoked a particular term
satisfactory now that's not quite what
david deutsch says deutsch talks about
good explanations and that is broader
than just science science is of course
that domain of inquiry that is about the
physical world and we can include there
the chemical and geological and
biological and astronomical and so on
world as aspects of that physical world
so science is about good explanations
which are hard to vary explanations of
the world the physical world
popper says satisfactory
and he'll say something more about that
in just a moment but as we're about to
read he gets into some jargon this is
again a product of his time
and i've always found what he's about to
say in the way that he says it a little
bit too jargony and as many people
listening will know i'm not a fan of
jargon these aren't quite neologisms at
all he certainly didn't invent the word
but again they're a product of his time
and it's a philosopher talking to other
philosophers i think we can tend to do
without them for the most part
but for the moment i'll explain what
they are
read through what popra is saying and
then we can see that really you can kind
of dispense with them so let's go on
papa writes quote
by an explanation or a causal
explanation is meant a set of statements
by which one describes the state of
affairs to be explained the explecandom
while the others the explanatory
statements form the explanation in the
narrower sense of the word the explicans
of the explacandom
end quote
okay so as you can see it's a little
confusing if you're not a professional
philosopher already we've got this
explicandum and explicans distinction
explanation is fine no one's got a
problem with explanation that's the
thing we're trying to explain but
explecandom
well as he's saying there explicandom
just means the thing in need of an
explanation so at night you go outside
and you see small lights in the sky
that's your explacandom you don't know
what they are yet perhaps you might be a
young child you might have been living
10 000 years ago you might have been
growing up in a cave in afghanistan for
the last 20 years whatever those lights
in the sky are the things in need of an
explanation
i'd rather say well that's your problem
or that's the question
the lights are real you're not just
imagining them they're not
hallucinations but what are they well
you might say
they are holes in a vast black glass
dome that encircles the entire planet
and beyond this there is a region of
white light so through those holes comes
that light
now that's an explanation it's not a
good explanation it's not testable for
all practical purposes either so far as
i know if you really believe that unless
you send a rocket up there but then
you've got other issues about how the
rocket works in a context where you
believe in the celestial sphere
but whatever the case
you've got a glass dome over the earth
that's the claim that's being made
that's the explicans a part of the
explanation an assertion about the world
there are holes in that dome
another part of the explanation another
explicans i find this all very clunky
but popper is precise of course the real
explanation
is that those lights are stars the stars
are bright the stars are also far off so
they appear dim
they are bright because they're hot they
are hot because they're vast in mass
with huge mass comes high gravity with
with high gravity comes high pressure at
the core of any such thing and if the
pressure is high enough because the mass
is high enough
fusion can happen fusion happens because
well i won't go on but you can see here
more and more explicans in poppa's
terminology are going into the overall
explanation the explacandom is lights in
the sky
an explicant of this is those lights are
stars
stars can then be seen as a new
explacandom another thing in need of
explanation and the explicans of that is
stars are big spheres of plasma
undergoing fusion and the explecandom
then becomes fusion and so it goes and
the conjunction of these in a sense
makes up the explanation
let's go back to popper and he wrote
quote
we may take it as a rule that the
explacandom is more or less well known
to be true or assumed to be so known for
there is little point in asking for an
explanation of a state of affairs which
may turn out to be entirely imaginary
flying sources may represent such a case
the explanation needed may not be of
flying sources but of reports of flying
sources yet should flying sources exist
then no further explanation of the
reports would be required the explicans
on the other hand which is the object of
our search will as a rule not be known
it will have to be discovered
thus scientific explanation whenever it
is a discovery will be the explanation
of the known by the unknown end quote
okay so to unpack that there especially
where he says
the explicandum is more or less well
known to be true
i think that by true he really means
real it exists it's out there in the
world it's not entirely part of your
imagination
and by the way it's interesting that he
uses flying sources here if you want the
david deutch take on such things see my
podcast episode 72
titled david deutch comments on a recent
ufo sighting a question for david number
three
so what popper is saying there though in
the paragraph i just read is that the
problem with flying sources typically is
the reports
what are the reports about it's not
flying sources as such it's reports of
them well it may be the case there are
flying sources actual flying sources and
we should be careful what we mean by
that what we mean are alien spacecraft
traveling here to earth from light years
away not people throwing plates and
dishes into the air and others wondering
what was that
not that kind of flying saucer but the
thing is we have reports of flying
sources even through to today but that's
it we have to explain the reports the
explicandum is the reports not the
sources
the reports of flying sources almost
always turn out to be something that's
not a flying saucer like the planet
venus or a hallucination or a shooting
star or name your mundane explanation
the flying saucer is a label for a
problem not the name of a solution if an
actual sorcerer crashed and it was
clearly not of this world ah then we
have a new explecandom then it's not
merely a report it's an actual flying
saucer the problem then demands an
explanation in terms of where the heck
did this come from how and who and so on
was it venus or mars or an andromeda
strain klingons etc and let me just go
back to the very final sentence that i
read there from that paragraph popper
said
thus a scientific explanation
whenever it is a discovery will be the
explanation of the known by the unknown
and isn't that nice it's very
reminiscent of something that david
deutsch says
david doesn't say the known by the
unknown he improves it he speaks of the
scene in terms of the unseen and that is
more precise that is an improvement and
the reason i say that is because saying
that the known is explained by the
unknown implies that part of the
explanation is unknown but this is not
quite right or at least the emphasis is
a little bit murky it might not have a
complete explanation of course
explanations are not fully
self-contained some parts remain
unexplainable and indeed pop is about to
talk about that we cannot have complete
explanations but this known in terms of
unknown thing actually arises from a
discussion popper is having in this
paper
about berkeley bishop berkeley and mark
and it all gets a bit esoteric and
that's coming from me doing a podcast on
an obscure essay by papa but anyways a
note in poppa's text here at this point
in his essay leads one on a bit of a
goose chase to another book of his
conjectures and refutations and in that
book if we look up what he's talking
about when he says the known as
explained in terms of the unknown well
i'll just quote from conjectures and
refutations the bit where he's referring
us to papa writes quote
so we can now admit without becoming
essentialist that in science we always
try to explain the known by the unknown
the observed and observable by the
unobserved and perhaps unobservable at
the same time we can now admit without
becoming instrumentalist what berkeley
has said of the nature of hypothesis in
the following passage which shows both
the weakness of his analysis its failure
to realize the conjectural character of
all science including what he calls laws
of nature and also its strength its
admirable understanding of the logical
structure of hypothetical explanation
end quote
so what i would say is we can see right
there he actually does say the observed
by the unobserved we can explain the
observed in terms of the unobserved
which is far closer to the mark i prefer
david's which is simpler language the
scene in terms of the unseen lights in
the sky at night you can see them
they're the scene you explain them in
terms of fusion reactions in the core of
those stars hundreds of light years away
unseen and indeed in principle unseeable
given how observation requires an
observer and observers so far as we know
cannot exist in the core of stars but
that's a side issue we can see here how
david has clarified popper let's go back
to the original essay papa writes quote
the explicans in order to be
satisfactory
satisfactoriness may be a matter of
degree
must fulfill a number of conditions
first it must logically entail the
explecandom secondly the explicans ought
to be true although it will not in
general be known to be true in any case
it must not be known to be false even
after the most critical examination if
it is not known to be true as will
usually be the case there must be
independent evidence in its favor in
other words it must be independently
testable and we shall regard it as more
satisfactory the greater the severity of
the independent tests it has survived
end quote so popper was heavily
influenced by a philosopher
mathematician called alfred tarski
indeed his book objective knowledge is
dedicated to taski and taski had a nice
view of truth which was about
correspondence i think it's true if it
corresponds to something in reality but
anyway papa used the word true pretty
liberally more liberally than i do and
the reason i'm not very liberal with it
is that following david i would say that
truth it definitely exists i'm not a
relativist truth is a property of
propositions so we can never be in a
position to say that some part of an
explanation the explicans can ever be
known to be true known means something
like have an explanation of in many
cases anyway and given no explanation as
final as i say papa will come to shortly
known to be true
is a paradox of a kind if you take papa
seriously because true is final if a
thing is known to be true then what we
are saying is it could be false that it
could not possibly be false it's one of
those cases where i'd love to be able to
speak to papa exactly about that and to
see what he meant but we'll pass over
this the point in this paragraph is more
about the fact that any given part of
your explanation
should itself be testable in science
that's the key point i would not say
evidence in its favor as he said i think
that has a bit of an odor of
justificationism about it the idea that
evidence can accumulate and thereby make
a theory more likely to be true or
actually true or something like that
again i think popper is actually trying
to win over his opponents with phrases
like this at times and i think that's
right to do if you want to have any
readers at all left if you're absolutely
tearing a part of some hitherto
pre-existing fabric of an entire
discipline like philosophy philosophy of
science and epistemology which is what
papa has done throughout his work so he
has to try and play the game of
attracting people to his work before
undermining all of their most cherished
beliefs so i understand the motivation
of wanting to speak in terms of people
who completely disagree with you
he's playing a difficult game it must
have been so difficult at times to be
poppa to go into these discussions
having a having to operate in two
different worlds of language the one
where he's trying to better understand
what these words mean
and everyone else who is cleaving
closely to what for example the
dictionary says but anyways in that
paragraph i just read he said the actual
important thing there
the various parts of an explanation
should be testable indeed the severity
as he says of the testability is
important so highly precise in other
words you know if i make a testable
claim like
this ball will fall to the ground if i
drop it that's one thing if i say it
will fall at 9.8 meters per second
squared that's something else and if i
say it will fall initially at 9.8 metres
per second squared and then 9.801 meters
per second squared and then 9.805 meters
per second squared and so on increasing
to a maximum of 9.81 metres per second
squared just before it hits the ground
i'm getting even more precise more risky
so to speak by the way papa will
actually use an example like this
shortly i'll explain why that happens
too when i get there but for now i'm
skipping a paragraph that he's got there
and going instead to an example he uses
to illustrate the satisfactory versus
unsatisfactory distinction that he has
we will see here echoes at the beginning
of infinity so popper writes quote
consider the following dialogue
why is the sea so rough today
because neptune is very angry
by what evidence can you support your
statement that neptune is very angry oh
don't you see how very rough the sea is
and is it not always rough when neptune
is angry
this explanation is found unsatisfactory
because just as in the case of a fully
circular explanation the only evidence
for the explicans is the explacandom
itself the feeling that this kind of
almost circular or ad-hoc explanation is
highly unsatisfactory and the
corresponding requirement that
explanations of this kind should be
avoided are i believe among the main
motive forces of the development of
science
dissatisfaction is among the first
fruits of the critical or rational
approach end quote so that's lovely he's
getting to the idea there that
science is a problem-solving exercise
and when you have this feeling of
dissatisfaction something's not quite
right it's there that you can make
progress
and in terms of that example what he's
saying is so the thing in that example
that is in need of the explanation is
why is the sea so rough
why we ask is it so very rough today
well if we say because neptune is so
very angry and it's always rough when
neptune is angry we've got nowhere the
bit of the explanation that is invoked
the sea is angry when neptune is rough
is not testable because we will just say
when it's more rough neptune is more
angry and when it's less rough neptune
is less angry this is what happens when
people try to support a theory with
evidence each day no matter the state of
the sea
that counts as evidence supporting the
claim
the anger of neptune makes the c rough
but that itself is never testable which
is what we want in modern language the
way david explains this
we say that the neptune theory is easy
to vary
this takes the idea of satisfactory
versus unsatisfactory explanations that
popper devised a big step forward
the hard to vary criterion for a good
explanation is more precise than what
papa offered neptune after all could be
swapped out for poseidon or ulmo he's
from lord of the rings or aquaman take
your pick it's easy to vary but the idea
that the action of the sun heating the
oceans creating air currents that can
cause high pressure in one place and low
pressure in another and this causes wind
and the wind causes waves and that makes
the sea rough well we can't just go
swapping out the sun for something else
in the sky we can't go swapping high
pressure for low pressure and wind for
anything else but let's continue
papa wrote quote
in order that the expla cans should not
be ad hoc it must be rich in content it
must have a variety of testable
consequences and among them especially
testable consequences which are
different from the explacandom
end quotes
okay so yes the explicans the parts of
the explanation
actually invoke the existence of things
that previously were unseen or
unobserved those things then form a part
of the testable content of the
explanation and this is why empiricism
is false a point which we have made here
in this podcast many times the
explanation consists of a bunch of
unseen things but we can test our
explanation of those unseen things
because those unseen things give rise to
the things we do see and typically the
only known explanation of the things we
do see and which we can measure and
experiment on and so on is the unseen
things to deny the unseen is to deny
reality but the only unseen things we
say exist are the ones that actually
appear in our best explanations not just
any unseen things this makes the
difference between unseen roman gods and
unseen fusion reactions in distant stars
now i'm going to skip another large part
of the essay and papa goes on to speak
about the case of universal laws he
writes quote only if we require that
explanations shall make use of universal
statements or laws of nature
supplemented by initial conditions can
we make progress towards realizing the
idea of independent or non-ad-hoc
explanations
for universal laws of nature
may be statements with a rich content so
that they may be independently tested
everywhere
and at all times thus if they are used
as explanations they may not be ad hoc
because they may allow us to interpret
the explicandum as an instance of a
reproducible effect
all this is only true however if we
confine ourselves to universal laws
which are testable that is to say
falsifiable end quote
now here ad hoc means something like
made up for a specific purpose rather
than being general so general has to be
universal in fact and the concept of
universal means to apply everywhere what
we're after are universal explanations
of various things universal ways in
which knowledge is created the universal
principles of wealth creation universal
laws of chemistry or physics of the
drift of continents the formation of
rocks and so on but broadly speaking
physics physical laws they don't just
apply in the laboratory where the
physicist is working they apply
everywhere in the universe and at all
times papa goes on to say quote
the question
what kind of explanation may be
satisfactory leads to the reply an
explanation in terms of testable and
falsifiable universal laws and initial
conditions and an explanation of this
kind will be the more satisfactory the
more highly testable these laws are and
the better they have been tested this
applies also to the initial conditions
end quote
now to me
testable and falsifiable are the same
thing but maybe he is saying that for
emphasis as to the initial conditions
thing well as we know david deutsch has
invented constructor theory which goes
deeper than this conception of physics
perhaps it's better in the future not to
specify what forms the laws must be or
what kind of explanations can be
developed but it's just say
what kind of explanation may be said to
be good well in science testable is part
of it but a good explanation is hard to
vary as to whether it needs to be about
laws and initial conditions well we know
it does not it can be about what is
possible and impossible can there be
more still i imagine so but there is no
reason to close off the possibility of
inventing still more modes of
explanation perhaps providence or
intentions and so on can actually be
brought into physics one day who knows i
guess poppa did not really imagine that
physics might begin to make its first
steps into epistemology tentatively but
it is happening
let's keep going papa writes quote
in this way the conjecture that it is
the aim of science to find satisfactory
explanations leads us further to the
idea of improving the degree of
satisfactoriness of the explanations by
improving their degree of testability
that is to say by proceeding to better
testable theories which means proceeding
to theories of ever-richer content of
higher degrees of universality and of
higher degrees of precision this no
doubt is fully in keeping with the
actual practice of the theoretical
sciences we may arrive at fundamentally
the same result also in another way if
it is the aim of science to explain then
it will also be its aim to explain what
so far has been accepted as an explicans
for example a law of nature thus the
task of science constantly renews itself
we may go on forever proceeding to
explanations of a higher and higher
level of universality unless indeed we
were to arrive at an ultimate
explanation that is to say an
explanation which is neither capable of
any further explanation nor in need of
it end quote
so ultimate or final or an end of
infinity and an end of science and an
end of progress now we know what david
thinks about all this and what we should
all think about all this
it is possibly a prime motivation for
his book the beginning of infinity but
what does papa have to say about it well
let's read on quote he writes
but what are ultimate explanations
the doctrine which i have called
essentialism amounts to the view that
science must seek ultimate explanations
in terms of essences if we can explain
the behavior of a thing in terms of its
essence of its essential properties then
no further question can be raised and
none need to be raised except perhaps
the theological question of the creator
of the essences end quote and then
popper goes into a long discussion about
descartes and newton descartes thought
one could get to final answers but
newton didn't seem to the example popper
uses is in newton's willingness to admit
that although he did indeed have a law
of gravity and made more progress on the
nature of gravity than anyone else
before him he nevertheless never said
and said he could not say what actually
gravity really was what actually caused
the force of gravity he did not know and
he said as much he accepted he had made
some progress but not found that answer
which is rather odd given how so many
physicists who came after him did indeed
make noises about how newton was almost
lucky because of the fact he found the
once and for all final theory of gravity
when newton himself seemed to think he
didn't or didn't quite there was more to
do there's always more to do popper
actually goes on to quote newton in the
principia and newton wrote quote
so far i have explained the phenomena by
the force of gravity but i have not yet
ascertained the cause of gravity itself
and i do not arbitrarily or ad hoc
invent hypotheses end quote of newton
now it might be said that popper is kind
of criticizing newton for apparently not
even trying so for newton well newton
thinks he is deriving rather than
conjecturing of course he is reading
from the book of nature and that book
does not tell him what the cause of
gravity is at least this is one way of
trying to understand what popper
eventually goes on to say about newton
whatever the case essentialism is the
misconception that in a physical thing
like gravity or an electron or even a
bacterium or a person there is no such
final thing to be found which when
you've found it its essence so to speak
then all the explaining of that thing
has been done this never happens like
gravity we find that it obeys the
inverse square law then we find well not
exactly and then we find it's the
curvature of space-time but what is
space-time made of if that even makes
any sense and is it truly continuously
divisible these are open questions with
gravity even now must the gravitational
constant truly be constant a person is a
universal explainer but is that the
essence of a person i wouldn't think so
it's more a precise statement of the
problem that could not even have been
articulated before anyways papa goes on
quote i do not believe in the
essentialist doctrine of ultimate
explanation in the past critics of this
doctrine have been as a rule
instrumentalists they interpreted
scientific theories as nothing but
instruments for prediction without any
explanatory power i do not agree with
them either but there is a third
possibility a third view as i have
called it it has been well described as
a modified essentialism with emphasis on
the word modified end quote
well there we have classic popper of
course he always finds the third way he
rejects the false dichotomy just because
you've got x and y before you and x and
y are all you know and form your
spectrum of choices does not mean they
are the only choices you in fact have
you can actually use your mind and
create something new he goes on to say
quote
this third view which i uphold
modifies essentialism in a radical
manner
first of all i reject the idea of an
ultimate explanation i maintain that
every explanation may be further
explained by a theory or conjecture of a
higher degree of universality there can
be no explanation
which is not in need of a further
explanation for none can be a
self-explanatory description of an
essence such as an essentialist
definition of a body as descartes
suggested secondly i reject all what is
questions questions asking for what a
thing is what is its essence or its true
nature for we must give up on the view
characteristic of essentialism that in
every single thing there is an essence
an inherent nature or principle such as
the spirit of wine in wine which
necessarily causes it to be what it is
and thus to act as it does
this animistic view explains nothing but
it has led to essentialists like newton
to shun relational properties such as
gravity and to believe on the grounds
felt to be a priori valid that a
satisfactory explanation must be in
terms of inherent properties as opposed
to relational properties end quote so
the first thing he says is that all
explanations will eventually need a
further explanation and then the second
thing he says is that there are no
essences no place in science where the
buck stops here so to speak where you
found the ultimate essence
he goes on to write quote
the third and last modification of
essentialism is this we must give up on
the view closely connected with animism
and characteristic of aristotle as
opposed to plato that it is the
essential properties inherent in each
individual or singular thing which may
be appealed to as the explanation of
this thing's behavior for this view
completely fails to throw any light
whatever on the question why different
individual things should behave in like
manner if it is said because their
essences are alike the new question
arises why should there not be as many
different essences as there are
different things
end quote so all of this is the problem
of essentialism
okay so people aren't people at the time
were
not fixated on trying to find universal
laws that applied everywhere at all
times but rather these essences what the
final ultimate nature of a thing
happened to be
and papa thinks all of this is
misconceived instead
don't look for the essence of something
look instead in science for more and
more universal laws
and so after skipping a few paragraphs
that i'm doing now he then goes on to
say quote
by choosing explanations in terms of
universal laws of nature
we offer a solution to precisely this
last platonic problem
for we conceive all individual things
and all singular facts to be subject to
these laws the laws which in their turn
are in need of further explanation
thus explain regularities or
similarities of individual things or
singular facts or events and these laws
are not inherent in the singular things
nor are they platonic ideals outside the
world laws of nature are conceived
rather conjectural descriptions of the
structural properties of nature of our
world itself
end quote
now here i would say there's just a
little ambiguity
there are the laws of nature notice the
definite article there the
and make it capitalized the laws now
those laws the laws of nature exist
independently of what we think about
them what we know about them just like
particles do or cats do or crayons do
but our understanding of the laws of
nature they're conceived they are
conjectural popper understood this of
course i would say and it's simply
because language is imprecise at times
but sometimes we have to be very careful
very much so in epistemology to
distinguish between the thing itself and
our understanding of the thing they're
clearly not the same the laws of nature
like this there's our understanding of
the laws of nature there's the standard
model of particle physics but the
standard model of particle physics isn't
necessarily the final word in fact we
would say it's not the final word it
can't be the final word there's open
questions there and so
does the standard model of particle
physics constitute
the laws of particle physics well it's
our understanding of the laws
but we'll never get to the final
understanding of the laws of physics
in fact popper kind of gets to this in
the next paragraph where he says quote
here then is the similarity between my
own view the third view and essentialism
although i do not think that we can ever
describe by our universal laws and
ultimate essence of the world i do not
doubt that we may seek to probe deeper
and deeper into the structure of our
world or as we might say into properties
of the world that are more and more
essential or of greater and greater
depth end quote
so i think it's possibly better if he
just stuck with greater depth he didn't
have to concede more and more essential
more fundamental is okay more
fundamental is okay that seems to be
better but more essential that might be
misleading we can reject essences
altogether and therefore not worry about
being more or less essential because the
essence doesn't exist even to begin with
david deutsch likes to point out that he
works on the foundations of physics but
he's not a foundationalist when one says
they are working on the foundations in
physics what they mean is they are
working on the deepest theories known
and trying to go still deeper the most
fundamental what other people call the
foundations the deepest known
but this does not imply they are the
literal foundations
actual foundations are in a sense where
a structure stops
or are they
because that too is ambiguous if the
foundations of physics are like the
foundations of a building then of course
there is something deeper there
something that hit the two was not
regarded as being a necessary part of
the structure
in physics something that is outside of
physics like constructor theory or like
computation or in the case of an actual
building are the foundations the bricks
and steel columns on which the ground
floor sits
or is it the existence of a basement or
the concrete slab on which the basement
rests
or is it necessarily the case that you
need to have a bedrock beneath all this
which if it was less stable than it was
or didn't exist it wouldn't be a solid
foundation or is it what is below even
the bedrock deeper geological structures
not normally thought of as being a
necessary part of a building at all well
it depends on how far you want to push
the analogy but we can speak about the
fundamentals the deepest known theories
that explain the most encompass the most
and have the greatest reach
now papa really gets into the swing of
things and i find the following passages
like this brilliant because remember it
really is unprecedented he's the first
to come up with this and he says quote
every time we proceed to explain some
conjectural law or theory by a new
conjectural theory of a higher degree of
universality we are discovering more
about the world trying to penetrate
deeper into its secrets and every time
we succeed in falsifying a theory of
this kind we make a new important
discovery for these falsifications are
most important they teach us the
unexpected and they reassure us that
although our theories are made by
ourselves although they are our own
inventions they are nonetheless
genuine assertions about the world for
they can clash with something we never
made end quote
that's brilliant that's perfect and
that's eloquent and i think it's
important to keep in mind that again he
was the first to say things like this
and it said so well there
so although and again just to well let
me just read those words again
our falsifications our theories they
teach us the unexpected and they
reassure us that although our theories
are made by ourselves
although they are our own inventions
they are nonetheless genuine assertions
about the world for they can clash with
something we never made so we have this
idea of creativity and criticism it's
just beautiful the way that he expresses
it there that isn't some of this
knowledge is indeed a pure product to
some extent of our minds but it
encounters reality it clashes as he says
there and that clash is with something
we did not make the thing we made
encountering the thing we did not make
and of course by the time he wrote this
he's already been engaged for many years
in long discussions about all of this so
he has refined his position
but it still reads as clearly as anyone
writing today along similar lines could
possibly manage papa goes on to write
extensively about the concept of depth
now i'll read some of it but mainly i'll
just summarize in the next few
paragraphs he says that depth has
something to do with simplicity
and this is something like coherence or
brevity and something to do with
richness of content so this is what
depth is the depth of a theory has
something to do with simplicity and
richness and this kind of gets the idea
that david refines called reach
reach means that the content of the
explanation has an effect on
far-reaching hence reach on far-reaching
subjects on distant subjects so what
happens in physics absolutely has
consequences for chemistry but also
aviation computing etc physics has
maximal reach mathematics sometimes has
a reach sometimes a particular theorem
has nothing to do with the physical
world philosophy likewise sometimes it
has reached like an epistemology
sometimes it's a little bit more
parochial anyways what poppa says about
depth and it being about simplicity and
richness is that he cannot define or
restrict what he means here he is
appealing to intuition which is quite
right as david says no language can be
perfectly precise but we can still have
a reasonable understanding we
can get an idea of what depth is or
degrees of depth by considering an
actual example
and papa turns to the history of physics
for this so let's go down that road with
him for a moment
and he writes quote
it is well known that newton's dynamics
achieved a unification of galileo's
terrestrial and kepler's celestial
physics
it is often said that newton's dynamics
can be induced from galileo's and
kepler's laws and it has even been
asserted that it can be strictly deduced
from them but this is not so from a
logical point of view newton's theory
strictly speaking contradicts both
galileos and kepler's although these
latter theories can of course be
obtained as approximations once we have
newton's theory to work with for this
reason it is impossible to derive
newton's theory from either galileos or
keplers or both whether by deduction or
induction for neither a deductive nor an
inductive inference can ever proceed
from consistent premises to a conclusion
that formally contradicts the premises
from which we started i regard this as a
very strong argument against induction
end quote so what he's saying here is
theories are
grand creations they are grand
conjectures they are creative acts
they're invented and in a sense this is
this is kind of
coming at that age old distinction
between is it discovered or is it
invented well
the invention is the theory the
discovery is the encounter with reality
in either case it's not a deduction from
things known earlier or from things
induced either as induction would have
it it's creative it is conjectured
okay so now i'm going to
read a couple of paragraphs and stop
along the way and just make a few
comments rather than flagging that too
much
papa writes quote i should now briefly
indicate the contradictions between
newton's theory and those of his
predecessors
galileo asserts that a throne stone or a
projectile moves in a parabola except in
the case of a free vertical fall when it
moves with constant acceleration in a
straight line we neglect air resistance
throughout this discussion from the
point of view of newton's theory these
assertions are both false for two
distinct reasons just pausing there in
my little reflection on this yes so if
you
learn
high school undergraduate
physics
at a low enough level and you try and
predict the path you try and do the
mathematics the physics
in order to predict where a cannonball
will land let's say what the range of a
cannonball is what the height of a
cannonball is and so on you presume
galileo type theory you presume the
projectile moves in a parabola and you
can get relatively precise results for
this but strictly speaking we also learn
that it is false it's false for a number
of reasons not least of which is of
course when you're firing some kind of
object like a cannonball what's actually
going on is the thing is trying to get
into orbit if you throw if you were to
fire the thing fast enough it would
indeed enter an orbit an orbit is
absolutely not a parabola it is
elliptical it's an ellipse so this is to
do with a part of mathematics called
conic sections
don't need to go into that the fact is
that a galileo asserts projectiles
follow parabolic paths
newton's theory
says that they follow elliptical parts
and newton has
an explanation as to why it can't be or
is not a parabola which we're going to
come to okay so popper has just said
there
that galileo asserts that a stone throne
or projectile moves in a parabola except
in the case of free vertical fall when
it moves with constant acceleration in a
straight line and then he goes on to say
quote
from the point of view of newton's
theory these assertions are both false
for two distinct reasons
the first is false because the path of a
long-range projectile such as an
intercontinental missile
thrown in an upward or horizontal
direction
will be not even approximately parabolic
but elliptic i'll just pause there i
don't think a missile is a well depends
on what he means by missile these days
of course what we mean by missile is a
rocket-propelled thing and a
rocket-propelled thing is actually
not a projectile at all uh it falls
under a thing called ballistics because
it's got a rocket behind it and so it's
being propelled you know and especially
in intercontinental missiles continental
missile is not just a projectile either
it can it can travel in any direction
you like because all you need to do is
to steer the thing using the rocket and
so you could
in fact have it going straight up into
the air so
the dispute is not really about
something that's got an engine on it and
again we could ask karl popper about
this but i think really
what we want to talk about is a long
range projectile something that's been
fired a long long way anyway that little
quibble aside let's keep going popper
writes
it becomes approximately a parabola only
if the total distance of the flight of
the projectile is negligible compared
with the radius of the earth
this point was made by newton himself in
his principia as well as in his
popularized version the system of the
world where he illustrates it with the
help of a figure reproduced on this page
newton's figure illustrates his
statement that if the velocity of the
projectile increases and with it the
distance of its flight it will at last
exceeding the limits of the earth pass
into space without touching it just
pausing now my reflection where you can
see the picture
if you're watching the video version of
this but if you're
merely listening on audio to this
let me describe what
uh newton's idea was his idea was you
take a cannon of some kind you stick it
on top of a mountain you fire the cannon
and of course the cannonball follows the
characteristic curve that a cannonball
will follow or that any projectile will
follow down towards the ground now what
if you fire the cannon still faster well
it goes further what if you fire it
faster than that well you can imagine a
situation where you fire it so fast with
such great velocity that it travels all
the way around to the other side of the
world what if you
fired it with such a velocity that it
traveled around to the other side of the
world and kept on going all the way back
to where it began well then you would
have this thing called an orbit and an
orbit is absolutely not a parabola
and nor is any partial orbit all of
these things follow a part of a iconic
section called an ellipse okay it's it's
an elliptical orbit
indeed
popper says
quote
thus a projectile on earth moves along
an ellipse rather than a parabola of
course for sufficiently short throws a
parabola will be an excellent
approximation
but the parabolic track is not strictly
deducible
from newton's theory unless we add to
the latter a factually false initial
condition and one which incidentally is
unrealisable in newton's theory since it
leads to absurd consequences to the
effect that the radius of the earth is
infinite
if we do not admit this assumption even
though it is known to be false
then we always get an ellipse in
contradiction to galileo's law according
to which we should obtain a parabola
end quote now
what unless papa emphasizing this for
well he's emphasizing again because of
this idea this misconception that
somehow
they're nascent hidden somehow lurking
in the theory of galileo is the theory
of newton that somehow you can deduce at
least part of newton from galileo and
the conjunction of
galileo and kepler perhaps you can
definitely get newton out of that so
that misconception went and so many
people still kind of believe today they
have this idea in their minds this is
the way sometimes that it's taught that
um
you're just deriving
more and more mathematics from this more
primitive sort of mathematics as if
these earlier physical theories these
simpler physical theories act as axioms
and doing the right mathematics you end
up with newton's theory but this is
wrong as papa says there they strictly
contradict each other they are each of
them creative conjectures
okay let's keep going papa
goes on to say quote a precisely
analogous logical situation arises in
connection with the second part of
galileo's law which asserts the
existence of an acceleration constant
from the point of view of newton's
theory the acceleration of free-falling
bodies is never constant it always
increases during the fall owing to the
fact that the body approaches near and
nearer to the center of attraction this
effect is very considerable if the body
falls from a great height although of
course negligible if the height is
negligible as compared with the radius
of the earth in this case we can obtain
galileo's theory from newtons if we
again introduce the false assumption
that the radius of the earth is infinite
or the height of the fall zero
pausing there my reflection end quote
for that bit
yes so
this is what i hinted at earlier on okay
you're making precise predictions about
things under something like galileo's
physics you can just assume and physics
students around the world understand
this perfectly well you just make the
assumption
that the acceleration due to gravity
near to the earth's surface is 9.81
meters per second squared
but this makes no sense at all if you're
trying to figure out exactly how fast
a dropped object from let's say
50 kilometers up will be traveling by
the time it reaches the ground you can't
assume 9.81 metres per second squared is
the acceleration of that object in
freefall and the reason that you can't
even ignoring air resistance the reason
you can't is because the acceleration
due to gravity
or the gravitational potential
at that height of 50 kilometers if you
like is certainly not 9.81 meters per
second and if you're interested in
geophysics it actually becomes really
really important this difference in the
value of the acceleration due to gravity
at different places around the earth
it's not a constant but in galileo's
theory it is a constant so how could you
possibly derive a theory like newton's
given a
which is a theory of non-constant
acceleration when bodies are dropped in
free form
from a theory which insists on
constant acceleration for bodies and
free fall well you can't of course you
can't square that circle one cannot be
derived from the other papa goes on to
say quote
the contradictions which i have pointed
out are far from negligible for long
distance missiles to these we may apply
newton's theory with corrections for air
resistance of course but not galileos
the latter leads simply to false results
as can easily be shown with the help of
newton's theory
end quote and
we can also port this whole discussion
to the modern day where we talk about
how you can't merely use
newton's theory of gravity in order to
do all sorts of interesting predictions
at a really precise level like a gps
system if you want highly precise gps
predictions of your position on the
earth newton's theory won't do it you
cannot derive general relativity from
newton's theory
general relativity is not merely a
numerical correction
to
newton's theory it's an entirely
different way of envisaging what space
time gravity is it's just that we say
that if you assume certain things
strictly false
in general relativity then you can get
you can you can
get to
newton's theory of gravity okay newton's
theory of gravity is a low velocity low
mass approximation to sum of relativity
anyways
papa then goes on to write about kepler
and compares kepler to newton in terms
of planetary motion and the same point
roughly is made newton's theory succeeds
in a way kepler's fails he uses the
example of kepler's law for how a
central body is orbited by smaller
bodies and in kepler's view there's this
thing the period radius relationship
which which is basically that the cube
of the radius of the orbit divided by
the square of the period
of the orbit it's a constant it's a
constant in the solar system for all
planets
it doesn't matter what the planet is
whether it's mercury or whether it's
jupiter
we just assume that there is this
constancy constant ratio but it's only
approximately constant and approximately
constant um is not constant and
approximately true is not true it's
false
jupiter's mass
the fact is the mass of all the planets
affects how fast they orbit the sun okay
and jupiter happens to have a large mass
so its mass does have a substantial
effect on how fast it orbits the sun but
not according to kepler's theory
kepler's theory just assumes all the
planets are the same and that difference
is measurable it's a deviation from
kepler's theory kepler's law of periods
is measurable you can reduce newton's
prediction to kepler's by assuming that
the orbiting planets like jupiter or
earth etcetera have zero mass but as
popper says on exactly that point and
i'll quote him he says
this is quite a good approximation from
the point of view of newton's theory but
at the same time putting
m equals zero
is not only strictly speaking false but
unrealizable from the point of view of
newton's theory a body with zero mass
would no longer obey newton's laws of
motion
thus even if we forget all about the
mutual attraction between the planets
kepler's third law
contradicts newton's theory end quote
his whole point is there papa's whole
point is that newton's theory cannot
possibly be derived from kepler's or
galileo's or any combination of them
newton's theory is a conjecture it is a
created explanation that does not
logically follow from the knowledge we
had before it was not deduced from
kepler and galileo it was not deduced
from observation it was not deduced from
anything it is conjectural knowledge as
popper goes on to say quote it is
important to note that from galileo's or
kepler's theories we do not obtain even
the slightest hint of how those theories
would have to be adjusted what false
premises would have to be adapted or
what conditions stipulated should we try
to proceed from these theories to
another and more generally should we try
another and more generally valid ones
such as newton's only after we are in
possession of newton's theory can we
find out whether and in what sense the
older theories can said to be
approximations to it
end quote
yes so only in retrospect do we look
back and go oh look from newton you can
say that kepler and galileo are
approximations yes if you make some
assumptions but the reverse is never
true you can you cannot begin with
kepler and galileo and with some minor
corrections get to newton this is always
the case and should be front of mind for
any physicist now working at the
frontiers just incrementally fiddling
with some bits of an existing theory
will not lead you to the big
breakthrough you need to go to the
foundations and rethink them papa goes
on to say quote we may express this fact
briefly by saying that although from the
point of view of newton's theory
galileos and kepler's are excellent
approximations to certain special
newtonian results newton's theory cannot
be said from the point of view of the
other two theories to be an
approximation to their results
all this shows that logic whether
deductive or inductive cannot possibly
make the step from these theories to
newton's dynamics it is only ingenuity
which can make this step
once it has been made galileo's and
kepler's results may be said to
corroborate the new theory pause there
end quote yes so ingenuity creativity
invention imagination all that sort of
stuff
not deduction not induction or anything
else like that now can we give people
help on how to be creative not really we
just have to allow them to be free until
such time as we have a better
understanding of how it is that people
make creative conjectures we just have
to allow them the freedom and the space
to be maximally creative because they're
not going to be deriving staff
from the book of nature or from
pre-existing knowledge
as for how popper ends that bit there he
says
galileo's and kepler's results may be
said to corroborate the new theory i've
never much liked that way of saying it
we could just say
those theories galileos and kepler's may
be said to be approximations to some
extent to that better theory low mass
approximations or newton's theory with
some substantial but false assumptions
like for example the mass of jupiter
makes no difference to planetary orbits
corroboration just sounds a little bit
justificationist and i think it can
mislead people
but again i think papa was trying to
concede to his peers who objected to him
when he said confirmations are not
possible for example so he's he kind of
came up with this other word he didn't
come up with the word but he thought oh
well i'll use the word corroboration
so it's like all these theories
agree
within a particular domain that's kind
of what he's getting at galileo's
kepler's newtons will all agree on a
certain kind of prediction given a
certain number of assumptions
anyways papa goes on to write that
newton's theory is no mere conjunction
of the theories that went before instead
it can be thought of as a new way of
explaining kepler's results and
galileo's results but also as
importantly corrections to them so this
is how to view the system of knowledge
here a deeper theory explains the less
deep theories and points out their
errors and corrects them that's what
increasing depth does and he says it
really well once again he says quote
i suggest that whenever in the empirical
sciences a new theory of a higher level
of universality successfully explains
some older theory by correcting it then
this is a sure sign that the new theory
has penetrated deeper than the older
ones the demand that a new theory should
contain the old one approximately for
appropriate values of the parameters of
the new theory may be called following
boar the principle of correspondence in
quotes
and then he also says that there is more
to depth still and i recommend reading
the original article for more details on
this specifically page 13 of my pdf
version of the document
the term depth
is kind of like the term explanation in
this sense we can always find new ways
of explaining it or more deeply
understanding depth or explaining more
about what explanations are anyway let's
read his concluding remarks we're just
about at the end of the article and
congratulations for persevering with me
if you have
all right papa says quote
the task of science which i have
suggested is to find satisfactory
explanations can hardly be understood if
we are not realists
for a satisfactory explanation is one
which is not ad hoc and this idea the
idea of independent evidence can hardly
be understood without the idea of
discovery of progressing to deeper
layers of explanation without the idea
that there is something for us to
discover and something to discuss
critically
and yet it seems to me that within
methodology we do not have to presuppose
metaphysical realism
nor can we i think derive much help from
it except of an intuitive kind
for once we have been told that the aim
of science is to explain and that the
most satisfactory explanation will be
the one that is most severely testable
and most severely tested
we know all that we need to know as
methodologists
that the aim is realizable we cannot
assert neither with nor without the help
of metaphysical realism which can give
us only some kind of intuitive
encouragement some hope but no assurance
of any kind and although a rational
treatment of methodology may be said to
depend upon an assumed or conjectured
aim of science it certainly does not
depend upon the metaphysical and most
likely false assumption that the true
structural theory of the world if any is
discoverable by man or expressible in
human language
just pausing there my reflection
that's that's a curious way of framing
things
i'm not sure if it's pessimism or not
but he's denying that
we can find the final true structure of
the world which i guess is fine but
but why one would need to go on to say
that
it isn't discoverable or expressible in
human language well yeah well we can't
get to the final
answer and if we can't get to the final
answer of course it's not going to be
expressible in human language but if we
could get there why wouldn't it be why
wouldn't that problem be soluble i don't
know anyway let's get going
papa finally writes last paragraph quote
if the picture of the world which modern
science draws comes anywhere near to the
truth in other words if we have anything
like scientific knowledge
then the conditions obtaining almost
everywhere in the universe
make the discovery of structural laws of
the kind we are seeking and thus the
attainment of scientific knowledge
almost impossible
for almost all regions of the universe
are filled by chaotic radiation and
almost the rest by matter in a similar
chaotic state in spite of this science
has been miraculously successful in
proceeding towards what i have suggested
should be regarded as its aim
this strange fact cannot i think be
explained without proving too much but
it can encourage us to pursue that aim
even though
we may not get any further encouragement
to believe that we can actually attain
it neither from metaphysical realism nor
from any other source end quote end of
the essay
now those last few remarks some of them
are a bit odd and might be worthy of
additional discussion but really i think
david deutsch answers them
poppa for example there seems to think
that most of the universe would be
hostile to knowledge production well
absent people of course and that would
be vacuous if there's no knowledge
creator no knowledge will be created
but given people it's clearly false it
doesn't matter how chaotic this
so-called radiation is why he uses the
word chaotic i don't know
the evidence out there in intergalactic
space is therefore the taking and as
david deutsch observes if you really
wanted to you could learn almost
everything in science by building a
sufficiently large space station using
the matter in otherwise empty space
because it's not completely empty after
all
we could learn about physics and
chemistry it might be a little bit
harder to learn about geology unless we
travel to a planet and it'd be really
hard to learn about ecosystems on earth
without going all the way back to earth
as he equipped that the only thing that
would be difficult to do is like nature
walks or whatever but we could certainly
learn about other aspects of biology we
could learn about evolution by natural
selection if it wasn't already known so
this idea of chaotic radiation being
some sort of impediment to us creating
knowledge in out there in the universe
the rest of the universe is hostile it's
only hostile
absent people but people are growing in
number growing in power and knowledge
and wealth and so one day even those
parts of space that popper is calling
chaotic and hostile won't be
even the earth as david deutsch points
out is itself hostile and we have
managed to eke out a way of creating an
open-ended stream of knowledge creation
so this idea of chaotic radiation is not
quite right at least the emphasis is not
right papa unusually
seems to have actually underestimated
the power of his own area of expertise
objective explanatory knowledge because
it is that that can make order out of
that chaotic radiation gather it with
even modest telescopes take measurements
and guess at what it all means
any region of space is almost favorable
for this to be done
not that it's easy
just that it's possible
if you'd like to support this endeavor
my podcast series or videos articles
analysis and the rest
consider becoming a patreon by searching
patreon and my name brett hall or
patreon and the name of this podcast
topcast or go to www.bretthall.org
there's a link on the front page there
that says donate which makes things
really easy until next time bye-bye